Lg/candid rev pre split (#169)
dfinity/candid: docs/modules/candid-guide/index.adoc

As this example illustrates, every method has a sequence of argument and result types. 
A method can also include annotations—like the `+query+` notation shown in this example—that are specific to the Internet Computer.

Given this simple interface description, it is possible for you to interact with this `+counter+` service directly from the command line or through a web-based front-end or programmatically from a Rust program or using through another programming or scripting language. 

In addition to interoperability, Candid supports the evolution of service interfaces by precisely specifying the changes that can be made without breaking existing clients. For example, you can safely add new optional parameters to a service without reconstructing the service or losing compatibility for existing clients.

== Why create a new IDL?

At first glance, you might think that other technologies, such as JSON, XML, or Protobuf, would suffice. 
However, Candid provides a unique combination of features that are not found in these other technologies.
The features that make Candid particularly well-suited for developing applications for the Internet Computer include the following:

> * Many interface description languages like JSON, XML, and Protobuf describe how to map individual values to bytes or characters, but they do not describe services as a whole. These languages focus on the data types you want to transfer instead of the methods that make use of those data types.

Reviewer: The gist is that they aren't interface description languages (and not normally called that). They are merely data description languages. So I would reword that slightly.

> * Candid implementations map the Candid value directly to types and values of the host language. In Candid, programmers do not construct or deconstruct some abstract `+Candid+` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Candid implementations map the Candid value directly to types and values of the host language. With Candid, programmers do not construct or deconstruct some abstract `+Candid+` value.
```

> * Candid defines rules for how software can be upgraded in a sound and compositional way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Candid defines rules for how services and their interface can be upgraded in a sound and compositional way.
```

> * Candid is inherently a higher order languages. With Candid, you can pass more than plain data, including references to services and methods. The Candid support for safe upgrades takes such higher-order use into account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Candid is inherently a higher-order languages. With Candid, you can pass more than plain data, including references to services and methods. Candid's support for safe upgrades takes such higher-order use into account.
```

 * Floating point types (`+float32+`, `+float64+`).
 * The Boolean type (`+bool+`).
 * Types for textual (`+text+`) and binary (`+blob+`) data.
 * Container types, including variants (`+opt+`, `+vec+`, `+record+`, `+variant+`).
 * Reference types (`+service+`, `+func+`, `+principal+`).
 * The special `+null+`, `+reserved+` and `+empty+` types.

All types are described in detail in the xref:candid-ref{outfilesuffix}[Reference] section.

The philosophy behind this set of types is that they are sufficient to describe the _structure_ of data, so that information can be encoded, passed around and decoded, but intentionally do not describe _semantic_ constraints beyond what’s needed to describe the representation. For example, there's no way to express that a number should be even, that a vector has a certain length, or that the elements of a vector are sorted.

Candid supports this set of types to allow a natural mapping of data types based on reasonable, canonical choices suitable for each host language, whether you are writing your code in Motoko, Rust, JavaScript, or some other language.

[#candid-service-descriptions]
== Candid service descriptions

> Once you are familiar with the Candid types, you can use them describe a service. A Candid service description file—a `+.DID+` file—can either be written by hand or generated from a service implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you are familiar with the Candid types, you can use them to describe a service. A Candid service description file—a `+.DID+` file—can either be written by hand or generated from a service implementation.
```

> Before you explore how to generate a service description file for a specific host language, let's take a closer look at the structure of the file and its constituent parts.

Reviewer: I'd avoid most references to "files", since they are just a way in which such a description can be physically stored, but on the IC they may occur in other form as well.
```suggestion
Before you explore how to generate a service descriptions for a specific host language, let's take a closer look at their structure and its constituent parts.
```

but typically it is , as described later.

> The simplest service description file that describes a service with no public methods would look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest service description specifies a service with no public methods and would look like this:
```

....
service : {}
....

> This service description is not very useful, so let's add a simple `+ping+` method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This service is not very useful, so let's add a simple `+ping+` method:
```

....
service : {
  ping : () -> ();
}
....

> This example describes a service supports a single public method called `+ping+`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example describes a service that supports a single public method called `+ping+`. 
```

Method names can be arbitrary strings, and you can quote them (`"method with spaces"`) if they are not plain identifiers.

> Methods declare a _sequence_ of arguments and result types. In the case of this `+ping+` method, no arguments are passed and none are returned, so the empty sequence `+()+ -> ()+` is used. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Methods declare a _sequence_ of arguments and result types. In the case of this `+ping+` method, no arguments are passed and none are returned, so for both the empty sequence `+()+` is used. 
```

> Methods declare a _sequence_ of arguments and result types. In the case of this `+ping+` method, no arguments are passed and none are returned, so the empty sequence `+()+ -> ()+` is used. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Methods declare a _sequence_ of arguments and result types. In the case of this `+ping+` method, no arguments are passed and no results are returned, so the empty sequence `+()+` is used for both arguments and results. 
```

Now that you've seen the simplest case, let's consider a slightly more complex service description. 
This service consists of two methods—`+reverse+` and `+divMod+`—and each method include a sequence of argument and result types:

....
service : {
  reverse : (text) -> (text);
  divMod : (dividend : nat, divisor : nat) -> (div : nat, mod : nat);
}
....

The method `+reverse+` expects a single parameter of type `+text+` and returns one value of type `+text+`.

The method `+divMod+` expects and returns two values, all of type `+nat+`.

== Naming arguments and results

> In this example service description file, the signature for the `+divMod+` method includes names for the argument and result values. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous example, the signature for the `+divMod+` method includes names for the argument and result values. 
```

These type definitions merely abbreviate an _existing_ type, they do not define a new type. It does not matter whether you use `address` in the function signature, or write out the records. Also, two abbreviations with different names but equivalent definitions, describe the same type and are interchangeable. In other words, Candid uses _structural_ typing.

== Specifying a query method

> In the last example service description file, you might have noticed the use of the `+query+` annotation for the `+get_address+` method. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last example, you might have noticed the use of the `+query+` annotation for the `+get_address+` method. 
```

For example:
....
service address_book : {
  set_address: (name : text, addr : address) -> ();
  get_address: (name : text) -> (opt address) query;
}
....

This annotation indicates that the `+get_address+` method can be invoked as an {IC} *query call*.

> As discussed in link:developers-guide:concepts/canisters-code{outfilesuffix}#query-update[Query and update methods], a query provides an efficient way to retrieve information from a canister without going through consensus so being able to identify a method as a query one of the key benefits of using Candid to interact with the {IC}.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for digging out the link!

> As discussed in link:developers-guide:concepts/canisters-code{outfilesuffix}#query-update[Query and update methods], a query provides an efficient way to retrieve information from a canister without going through consensus so being able to identify a method as a query one of the key benefits of using Candid to interact with the {IC}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As discussed in link:developers-guide:concepts/canisters-code{outfilesuffix}#query-update[Query and update methods], a query provides an efficient way to retrieve information from a canister without going through consensus, so being able to identify a method as a query one of the key benefits of using Candid to interact with the {IC}.
```

The point of Candid is to allow seamless invocation of service methods, passing arguments encoded to a binary format and transferred by an underlying transportation method (such as messages into or within the Internet Computer), and decoded on the other side.

As a Candid user, you do not have to worry about the details of this binary format. 
If you plan to _implement_ Candid yourself (for example, to support a new host language), you can consult the link:https://github.com/dfinity/candid[Candid specification] for details. 
However, some aspects of the format are worth knowing:

* The Candid binary format starts with `+DIDL…+` (or, in hex, `+4449444c…+`). If you see this in some low-level log output, you are very likely observing a Candid-encoded value.

* The Candid binary format always encodes _sequences_ of values, because methods parameters and results are sequences of types.

* The binary format is quite compact. A `+(vec nat64)+` with 125 000 entries takes 1 000 007 bytes.

* The binary is self-describing, and includes a (condensed) description of type of the values therein. This allows the receiving side to detect if a message was sent at a different, incompatible type.

> * As long as the sending-side serializes the arguments at the same type that the receiving side expects them, deserialization will succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* As long as the sender serializes the arguments at the same type that the receiver expects them, deserialization will succeed.
```

  public func subscribe(handler : func (Int) -> async ()) { … }
}
....

> When you compile this program, the {proglang} compiler automatically generates the Candid service description file with the interface shown above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you compile this program, the {proglang} compiler automatically generates a Candid service description file with the interface shown above.
```

Additionally, the official https://github.com/dfinity/candid/tree/master/test[Candid test data] is useful to make sure your implementation is compatible with Candid, even in slightly more obscure corner cases.

== Reference

> This section provides links to Candid tools and libraries for currently supported host languages and detailed reference information about Candid supported types.

Reviewer: Hm, it feels odd to lump the description of tools under the Candid language reference section. I'd move it somewhere else.

=== Tools and libraries

This section provides links to Candid tools and libraries for currently-supported host languages.

* The Motoko language has built-in support for Candid and the compiler uses it implicitly.

* To create Candid services or clients in Rust, you can use the https://crates.io/crates/candid[Candid crate].

* The https://github.com/dfinity/agent-js/[Internet Computer agent library for JavaScript] includes support for Candid.

* Community-supported libraries for Candid also exist for https://hackage.haskell.org/package/candid[Haskell], https://github.com/chenyan2002/ic-elm/[Elm] and https://github.com/seniorjoinu/candid-kt[Kotlin].

* The https://github.com/dfinity/candid/tree/master/tools/ui[Candid UI] creates a Web interface from the Candid interface of any canister.

=== Supported types

This section lists all the types supported by Candid.
For each type, the reference includes the following information:

* Type syntax and the syntax for the textual representation of the type.
* Upgrade rules for the type.
* Corresponding types in Rust, Motoko and Javascript.

> == Subtypes and supertypes

Reviewer: Starting a new section here is a bit of an odd break (and it should probably be a subsection).
```suggestion
Upgrade rules are given in terms of the possible _subtypes_ and _supertypes_ of a type.
```

Subtypes are the types you can change your method _results_ to.
Supertypes are the types that you can change your method _arguments_ to.

You should note that this reference only lists the specific subtypes and supertypes that are relevant for each type. 
It does not repeat common information about subtypes and supertypes that can apply to any type. 
For example, the reference does not list `+empty+` as a subtype because it can be a subtype of any other type.
Similarly, the types `+reserved+` and `+opt t+` are not listed as supertypes of specific types because they are supertypes of any type. 

> The `+empty+`, `+reserved+`, and `+opt t+` types are discussed separately, independent of other types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the sections about the <<type-empty,`+empty+` type>>, the <<type-reserved,`+reserved+` type>> and the <<type-opt,`+opt t+` type>> for details about their subtyping rules.
```

Author: Modified

[#type-text]

> == Type text

Reviewer: This and all the following sections are part of the language reference, so should probably remain to be subsections of Reference.
